# LaDDR model and data repository

This repository contains gene models, phenotypes, and other data generated by LaDDR, Latent Data-Driven RNA phenotyping. It also includes data from downstream genetic analyses, including cis-xQTLs from tensorQTL and weights and associations for multimodal transcriptome-wide association study (xTWAS) results using FUSION. The TWAS data covers 114 traits using GWAS data from [Publicly available GWAS summary statistics, harmonized and imputed to GTEx v8' variant reference](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3629742). For more information, see the publication "Data-driven RNA phenotyping captures genetically regulated dimensions of the transcriptome".

## Data Descriptions

### General info

`info/` contains the following metadata:

- `pcg_and_lncrna.tsv`: The protein-coding and lncRNA genes phenotyped in this study. Has columns gene_id, gene_name, gene_biotype, chrom, start, end, and strand.
- `tissues-gtex.txt`: A list of the 49 GTEx tissues with phenotypes and genetic analysis results.
- `gwas_metadata.txt`: Metadata originally included with the GWAS traits summary stats.
- `LDREF_b38ids_chr.tar.bz2`: LD reference files for TWAS.

### Files for running LaDDR

`laddr_models/` contains the following files needed to run LaDDR phenotyping on new data:

- `info_and_bins.tar.bz2`: Contains `info/`, generated by `laddr setup` and used by subsequent LaDDR steps, and `gene_bins/`, the gene bin definitions produced by `laddr binning`. These files can be used for both full and residual data-driven phenotyping.
- `models-ddp.tar.bz2`: The LaDDR models for data-driven phenotypes (DDP). They have been trained on RNA-seq coverage from all 54 GTEx v8 tissues and 33 TCGA cancer types.
- `models-rddp.tar.bz2`: The LaDDR models for residual data-driven phenotypes (rDDP). They have been trained on RNA-seq coverage from the 49 GTEx v8 tissues used for eQTL mapping, after regressing out six modalities of RNA phenotypes from Pantry. New data must be residualized in the same way before applying these models.

### Data-driven phenotype tables

RNA phenotypes were quantified for Geuvadis and 49 GTEx v8 tissues. The tables are in BED format, with the first three columns specifying the TSS coordinate of each phenotype's gene, i.e., the input format for `tensorQTL`. Values have been normalized for genetic analyses by quantile-normalizing samples to the average empirical distribution, followed by rank-based inverse-normal transformation per phenotype. For GTEx tissues, we included only samples with genotypes and converted sample IDs to individual IDs to match the genotypes.

### Covariates

For each tissue, the covariates include the first 20 principal components (PCs) of the data-driven phenotype table and the first 5 PCs of the genotype alternative allele count matrix. For hybrid xQTL mapping, covariates are computed from the combined table of knowledge-driven and residual data-driven phenotypes and used for cross-modality cis-QTL mapping. Covariates used for xQTL mapping are in a format compatible with tensorQTL (`*.covar.tsv`), while those used for xTWAS are in plink format for compatibility with FUSION (`*.covar.plink.tsv`).

### cis-xQTLs

`QTLs/` includes output files from tensorQTL run in `cis` mode (`*.cis_qtl.txt.gz`, top association per gene, even if not significant) and `cis_independent` mode (`*.cis_independent_qtl.txt.gz`, all conditionally-independent cis-QTLs). For hybrid xQTL mapping, tensorQTL was run on all six modalities of knowledge-driven phenotypes from Pantry plus residual data-driven phenotypes, so that xQTLs are conditionally independent across all of those phenotypes per gene. Aggregated tables of independent xQTLs are also provided for convenience:

- `qtls.gtex-ddp.tsv.gz`
- `qtls.gtex-hybrid.tsv.gz`
- `qtls.gtex-kdp.tsv.gz`
- `geuvadis/qtls.geuvadis-ddp_hybrid_kdp.tsv.gz`

### xTWAS

A set of TWAS transcriptomic models was generated for each tissue using FUSION. The outputs of the FUSION script `FUSION.profile_wgt.R`, i.e. tables giving cis-heritability and model stats per phenotype, are included in `twas_model_summaries` (`*.profile`). The weights themselves are available at https://pantry.pejlab.org/download.

TWAS associations were calculated for each model against summary stats for each of [114 GWAS traits previously harmonized to GTEx v8 variant reference](https://zenodo.org/records/3629742#.XjCh9OF7m90). Outputs of `FUSION.assoc_test.R` were concatenated across chromosomes, traits, and tissues and then filtered for significant associations (P<5e-8) to get one table of TWAS hits for full data-driven phenotypes and one for residual data-driven phenotypes.

LD reference files were downloaded from [here](https://data.broadinstitute.org/alkesgroup/FUSION/LDREF.tar.bz2) and modified by adding the `chr` prefix to chromosome names and converting the LDREF SNP IDs to match those in the genotypes, which looked like e.g. `chr1_13550_G_A_b38`. They are available in `info/LDREF_b38ids_chr.tar.bz2`.

## Files

This is a summarized outline of the data files. Files exist for every combination of values for the variables in curly braces. Run `check_repo.py` to check if all files are present.

```
├── covariates
│   ├── {ddp,hybrid}-{tissue}.covar.tsv
│   └── {ddp,rddp}-{tissue}.covar.plink.tsv
├── geuvadis
│   ├── {ddp,rddp}-GEUVADIS.bed.gz
│   ├── {ddp,hybrid}-GEUVADIS.cis_independent_qtl.txt.gz
│   ├── {ddp,hybrid}-GEUVADIS.cis_qtl.txt.gz
│   ├── {ddp,hybrid}-GEUVADIS.covar.tsv
│   ├── {ddp,rddp}-GEUVADIS.covar.plink.tsv
│   ├── {ddp,rddp}-GEUVADIS.profile
│   ├── {ddp,rddp}-GEUVADIS.twas_hits.tsv.gz
│   └── qtls.geuvadis-ddp_hybrid_kdp.tsv.gz
├── info
│   ├── gwas_metadata.txt
│   ├── LDREF_b38ids_chr.tar.bz2
│   ├── pcg_and_lncrna.tsv
│   └── tissues-gtex.txt
├── laddr_models
│   ├── info_and_bins.tar.bz2
│   ├── models-ddp.tar.bz2
│   └── models-rddp.tar.bz2
├── qtls
│   ├── {ddp,hybrid}-{tissue}.cis_independent_qtl.txt.gz
│   └── {ddp,hybrid}-{tissue}.cis_qtl.txt.gz
├── qtls.gtex-{ddp,hybrid,kdp}.tsv.gz
├── rna_phenotypes
│   └── {ddp,rddp}-{tissue}.bed.gz
├── twas_hits.gtex-{ddp,rddp}.tsv.gz
└── twas_model_summaries
    └── {ddp,rddp}-{tissue}.profile
```
